

# esx-boot

## Overview

esx-boot is the VMware ESXi bootloader.  

The same source tree builds two different bootloader configurations,
one for booting in UEFI mode, the other for booting in legacy BIOS
mode.

* UEFI esx-boot: Runs on its own directly on top of the host UEFI firmware.

* Legacy BIOS esx-boot: Runs on top of the open-source bootloader "syslinux".

You probably don't want to use esx-boot to boot anything other than
ESXi.  esx-boot has some support for a slightly extended version of
the Multiboot standard, but ongoing development is using a new 64-bit
boot API specific to VMware called ESXBootInfo.

## Try it out

esx-boot is not terribly easy to try out.

On an ESXi installation, the bootloader lives in the UEFI system
partition, which ESXi itself currently is not able to mount.  ESXi
does include an mtools build in /bin/mtools, so you can use that to
read and modify files in the system partition.

On an ESXi ISO image, see the documentation below for how those work.
If you want to modify an existing ISO, you'll need a tool that can
handle an ISO with two El Torito images.  Otherwise you'll lose the
feature of being able to boot the same ISO on both UEFI and legacy
BIOS.

It's easier to use your own bootloader build if you're network
booting.  See
https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/7.0/com.vmware.esxi.install.doc/GUID-B9DB94CA-4857-458B-B6F1-6A688726AED0.html
for general instructions about network booting ESXi.

### Prerequisites

* A Linux system to build on.

* An ESXi system to boot.

### Build & Run

1. ./configure

2. Edit the file env/toolchain.mk.  See the comments in the file.
Also see env/toolchain-local.mk for an example of building with the
toolchain on your local machine, or see env/toolchain-odp.mk for an
example of building with the VMware common development kit toolchain,
available on VMware's ODP (open source disclosure package) ISO images.

3. make

## Documentation

esx-boot consists of several modules.

The main bootloader module is called mboot. The mboot module is responsible for:

1. Reading ESXi's boot configuration file (boot.cfg), and retrieving information about:
   * location of the kernel and boot modules
   * kernel boot options
2. Loading the kernel and other modules from the boot media into main memory
3. Verifying the cryptographic signatures on the early modules for Secure Boot purposes.
4. Setting up system information (Multiboot or ESXBootInfo) structures and passing them to the kernel
5. Preparing the firmware for kernel hand-off.
6. Exiting from firmware (on UEFI, ExitBootServices).
7. Jumping to the kernel. 

Depending on how you boot ESXi, one or more other esx-boot modules may run prior to mboot.

### UEFI Boot

For UEFI boot from disk, UEFI firmware initially loads a UEFI build of
esx-boot's safeboot module from the FAT filesystem in the boot
partition (typically partition 1 or 4 depending whether the disk is
partitioned using GPT or MBR).  safeboot then determines which of the
bootbank partitions to boot from and invokes esx-boot's mboot module
with -p <partition> on the mboot command line.

For UEFI boot from CD/DVD, the UEFI firmware is not able to read the
ISO9660 file format of most of the ESXi disc. To get around this
problem, esx-boot's isobounce module is installed in the second El
Torito image of the ESXi CD/DVD. It is in the file
\EFI\BOOT\BOOTx64.EFI in the FAT filesystem in the El Torito image
(not in that filename in the ISO9660 filesystem!). isobounce loads
esx-boot's UEFI ISO9660 filesystem driver from the FAT filesystem in
the El Torito image, then runs esx-boot's mboot module.

For UEFI boot from the network, UEFI firmware can load esx-boot's
mboot module directly.  See
https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/7.0/com.vmware.esxi.install.doc/GUID-B9DB94CA-4857-458B-B6F1-6A688726AED0.html
for details.  Alternatively, you could use esx-boot's menu module to
set up a menu of different images to boot; see the top of menu.c for
documentation.

### Legacy BIOS Boot

Legacy BIOS boot starts with syslinux, and the esx-boot modules run on
top of syslinux.

For legacy BIOS disk boot, syslinux's configuration file,
\syslinux.cfg, tells it to run esx-boot's safeboot.c32 module with
suitable command-line options.  The safeboot module then determines
which of the bootbank partitions to boot from and invokes esx-boot's
mboot.c32 with -p <partition> on the mboot command line.

For legacy BIOS boot from CD/DVD, isolinux is installed in the first
El Torito image of the CD/DVD. The configuration file for isolinux is
/isolinux.cfg. This file tells syslinux to invoke esx-boot's mboot.c32
module with suitable command-line options.

For legacy BIOS boot from the network, pxelinux runs first and loads
esx-boot's mboot.c32.  See
https://docs.vmware.com/en/VMware-vSphere/7.0/com.vmware.esxi.install.doc/GUID-B9DB94CA-4857-458B-B6F1-6A688726AED0.html
for details.

### A note on UEFI Secure Boot

This open source release of esx-boot includes machinery for signing
the generated binaries for UEFI Secure Boot purposes.  A non-secret
test certificate is provided in the package as a sample.  Read the
source code and Makefiles if you would like to see how to sign the
binaries you create with your own certificate(s).

## Releases & Major Branches

We started esx-boot's github repository with the ESXi 6.7u1 version of
esx-boot as the root of the main (master) branch.  We push updates
for each released version of the bootloader, but we don't generally
push work-in-progress updates. We sometimes push small updates to fix compile issues discovered in the github release.

Newer esx-boot versions are always kept compatible with older versions
of the ESXi vmkernel (though not vice versa!), so we won't necessarily
branch esx-boot even when an older ESXi release needs a bugfix; we may
simply pull in the newest stable version from the main branch. There
are a few exceptions where we created branches and made point fixes for ESXi patch releases.

If you are interested in versions of esx-boot that have been used in
ESXi releases prior to the start of this repository, they are
available on VMware's ESXi Open Source Disclosure Package ISO images,
downloadable from http://www.vmware.com.

## Contributing

The esx-boot project team welcomes contributions from the
community. Before you start working with esx-boot, please read our
[Developer Certificate of Origin](https://cla.vmware.com/dco). All
contributions to this repository must be signed as described on that
page. Your signature certifies that you wrote the patch or have the
right to pass it on as an open-source patch. For more detailed
information, refer to [CONTRIBUTING.md](CONTRIBUTING.md).

## License

This product is licensed to you under the GNU GENERAL PUBLIC LICENSE
Version 2 license (the "License").  You may not use this product
except in compliance with the GPL 2.0 License.

This product may include a number of subcomponents with separate
copyright notices and license terms. Your use of these subcomponents
is subject to the terms and conditions of the subcomponent's license,
as noted in the LICENSE file.
